# Large-Dataset-analysis-on-Neonate-Morbidities

Objective: The Center for Disease Control (CDC) made some important recommendations as regards improving pre-conception health in the year 2006. The goal which is summarily to improve the health of women during pregnancy and the health of newborns in The United States. The CDC recommended increasing men's and women's pre-conception health knowledge, attitudes, and practices; another is to ensure that all American women of reproductive age receive pre-conception care services that will allow them to begin pregnancies in the best possible health. Given these benefits since over 18 years ago, the count of newborns without morbidity continues to decrease.
The objective of this paper is to analyze risk of Hemolytic and Perinatal Jaundice by race and ethnicity; and to investigate the knowledge available to public, identify the factors majorly contributing to morbidity in newborns especially genetic incompatibility and provide recommendations for government and stakeholders on family health.
Materials and Methods: This project is in two parts: interviews on SCD (Sickle Cell Disease); and the SPARCS dataset (2018-2020) analysis which involves descriptive and logistic regression analysis.
Results: There is miseducation that Blood inherited disorders due to genetic information incompatibility are endemic to the black population. People living with SCD and SCD advocacy organizations are discriminated against by stakeholders, insurance companies and employers. There is little or no media support for NGOs to educate the public. There is no local management of people living with SCD. There is lack of spread of genetic testing centers. Some physicians and health care providers do not know about SCD despite that 1 out of every 13 black US population have SCT.
Count of liveborns with no morbidities is 540626 while count of liveborn with morbidities is 7260. HJPJ fetuses’ prevalence is 0.77% among ‘Black African’ mothers, ‘White’ mothers have a prevalence of 0.97%, ‘Other’ race mothers have a prevalence of 1.17%, while ‘Multi-Racial’ mothers have a prevalence of 1.48%.
Multi-Ethnic mothers have a prevalence of 0.74%, Mothers of ‘Non-Hispanic’ origin have a prevalence of 1.02%, ‘Hispanic’ mothers have a prevalence of 1.45%.
	Multi-Racial mothers are 78% more likely to deliver neonates with Hemolytic Jaundice/Perinatal Jaundice as against ‘Black/African American’ mothers. Mothers of ‘Other’ racial origins (apart from ‘White’ mothers) are 34% more likely to deliver neonates with Hemolytic Jaundice/Perinatal Jaundice as against ‘Black/African American’ mothers. Non-Hispanic mothers are 39% less likely to deliver babies with HJPJ compared to Hispanic mothers. These results are statistically significant (P <= 0.05).
Discussion: Sickle cell disease affects every race; it is important that government educate the public more on this. Government should enact laws and implement them to ensure that fair consideration is given to people living with SCD as they are already economically disadvantaged; and also ensure that they are not discriminated against by healthcare stakeholders, employers and insurance companies. There should be a threshold level of SCD/HJPJ education for providers and its awareness across United States, then more can be done based on the degree of prevalence which may vary across locations. Genotype, Blood Group and Rhesus Factor information should be incorporated into Patient EHR, engaged by CDSS. Physicians via CDSS can advise adults of reproductive age of the risk of HJPJ and SCD, particularly O-negative mothers and individuals with AS genotypes.
	Black African mothers have the least prevalence of HJPJ babies among all races between 2018 and 2020. It is important to note that multi-racial women have double the prevalence of Black women. Every community should be educated on the risk of HJPJ; however, preference should be given to communities with high concentration of White, Multi-racial and other race mothers (aside the Black African population).
Mothers of Hispanic origin have the highest prevalence of HJPJ babies among all races between 2018 and 2020, followed by mothers of non-Hispanic and multi-Ethnic origin in decreasing order. Hispanic mothers also being at the greatest risk according to logistic regression analysis, education should be concentrated in communities with Hispanic mothers. 
Conclusion: The role of education is enormous; more funding is needed by NGOs to educate the public and stakeholders on the risk of SCD and HJPJ. More Genetic testing Centers should be established, and testing fee subsidized if possible. Government should enact bills to regulate discrimination across health institutions, insurance companies, employers and lenders. Genotype, Blood group and Rhesus factor should be incorporated into patient EHR for local management of people living with SCD; this will make an important impact together with CDSS. Incorporating this information will also improve health of people living with SCD by limiting their dependence on ED during acute pain crisis through patient centered outcomes offered by CDSS. CDSS will offer alerts and warnings to help PCPs offer proper medication and advice on healthy living habits. CDSS will also help PCPs offer patient-centered, evidence-based medical advice based on which group of genotype, blood group and rhesus factor a patient belongs to. There is need for more research to be done on awareness as regards informing potential parents on the importance of genetic testing before birthing their babies. Pre-conception and inter-conception counseling should be directed at both parents, not just mothers. Pre-conception counseling should randomly be given to patients based on their genetic information profile. Pre-conception screening and counseling provides proactive measures unlike newborn screening which does not but however exposes the presence of morbidities.  Further work should investigate communities/groups where G-6-PD deficiency is common, and database created to create surveillance. More research should focus on creating surveillance database for people living with SCD. SPARCS dataset should be updated to include SDoH such as education and economic/financial stability.
